Good afternoon and welcome to the
Audio Services in Mac OS X session.
I'm Craig Keithley.
I'm the USB and FireWire technology
manager in Worldwide Developer Relations.
A lot of audio devices these days
are moving to FireWire and USB,
and we have a great fondness of them.
We're especially interested in seeing
great FireWire audio devices using
the MLan standard in the future.
We are working very diligently to add
that support in an upcoming OS release.
I can't tell you when or where.
The thing that I want to stress
as I get ready to introduce the
engineering team is that Steve said in
his keynote that one of the developer
feedback items we got was audio support.
And I've been working with the audio team
and going through their presentations,
and I think you'll be very
excited by what we've got.
So with that,
I'd like to bring up Bill Stewart,
the manager of
Audio Software Engineering.
Thanks.
Okay, so I'd like to just give you some
overview of the audio and MIDI services
that we have shipping in Mac OS X today.
It came out with the
first version of Mac OS X.
And give you some idea of the sessions
that we have at the conference.
This is the first session and we're
going to be mainly focusing on the
lowest levels of the audio system,
how hardware is presented
to applications,
how applications can
talk to audio hardware.
And there's two sessions
tomorrow starting at 3:30 on
MIDI and MIDI services that
are provided in Mac OS X,
as well as the latest session at
5:00 is talking about some high level
services such as software synthesizers,
audio units and audio unit graphs.
And in the MIDI session tomorrow,
we'll actually go through some of the
services that we have in the software.
So, through some detail about some
of the performance and latency
characteristics of OS X,
there's been some good and bad,
usually misinformed
information about that.
And we'd like to sort of present to you
some information that we've got based
on some of the tests that we've done.
And you saw the keynote on Monday,
so there's some information
we'd like to give to you.
And that'll be mainly
in tomorrow's session.
Before I bring up Jeff Moore,
who will talk about the
bottom layers of the system,
I thought I should give you
some overview of what is on 10,
some of the things that we had in mind
when we were designing this system,
and some of the concerns that we sought
to address by re-architecting the system.
So, I think flexible audio format,
what does that mean?
Well,
we've seen audio come a long way since
two channels was the king of the day,
and we've now got multi-channel
fairly commonly placed in
a lot of different areas,
not just in the pro audio world,
but in consumer devices
and games and so forth.
We also realize that there's a
need to address the PCM format,
which is a standard sort of audio format.
We've got the raw sample data there,
and there's also a lot of devices coming
out now that deal with non-PCM formats,
like devices that will
take encoded format in,
say, AC3 as a DVD player or something.
So, we needed to take that
into consideration.
We also wanted to preserve as much of
the information as we could if we're
going to be doing signal processing.
A lot of the devices are not
just 16-bit devices anymore.
You'll have resolutions on
the devices up to 24 bits,
and when we were discussing this,
we thought that the best way to do this,
not only from a DSP point of view,
but also in terms of
representing the hardware,
is to present that in a format that
is capable of preserving the integrity
and the resolution that you require.
And also, as many of you are aware,
sample rates have gone up quite a
long way since 44.1K was the standard.
And so we needed to address that issue.
Another thing that we wanted to
do in the professional world,
you typically see a very strong
focus of audio being generated
and controlled by one application.
And in an operating system level,
that is not going to fly or it's
not going to be particularly useful
for applications that may want to
generate audio and they may not be
the focus application or they want a
sys beep and they're in the background
or all kinds of things like that.
So if you're going to have multiple
applications talking to the audio system,
you've then also got to understand, well,
what might be an appropriate latency for
one application is not an appropriate
latency for another application.
So we wanted to design a system that
took care of those issues and let
applications operate at a level of
detail that they were comfortable with.
Another weakness that we saw with
the existing sound manager stack
on Mac OS Classic systems was we
sometimes had no idea what time it was.
If you look at the samples that are
coming in or samples that are going out,
you can sort of guess at some
of the time information that
should be around those samples,
but you may not exactly know what
time it is and that has a lot of
ramifications for how you deal with
synchronization with other media,
with hardware that may be
doing both video and audio.
So we wanted to address that.
And if some of you know my history,
I have a particular fondness for Java,
so I felt we should present these
services not just to C programmers,
but also present an API for
the Java platform that would
be comfortable with the sound.
for people that are
working in that space.
This is a diagram of the
architecture that we have.
The white line in the diagram
is the difference between the
kernel space and then above it
is the different user spaces.
As you all know,
Mac OS X is a memory protected system.
Each client has -- each user space
has its own memory address mapping.
So below the white line you've
got the kernel and the I/O in
Mac OS X is handled by I/O Kit.
I/O Kit is a set of classes that deal
with different types of buses and
different types of hardware like PCI,
et cetera, FireWire, USB.
And the -- above the line,
the first layer that you see for
audio is called the Audio HAL.
HAL stands for Hardware
Abstraction Layer.
And the main services that you
would expect at that point is
that the Audio HAL is going to
cross the boundaries when it needs
to in order to talk to hardware.
And each user client of the system
is going to see different versions of
the HAL but then there must be some
global state if you've got two apps
talking to the same device for instance.
And so we'll be going through
in today's talk about some of
the stuff that goes on there.
And then on top of that,
in the client process,
you have services that in the
-- on the left hand side or no,
your right hand side,
you've got classic and classic
talks to the Audio HAL in order to
talk to hardware in the same way.
In the second process, you might have the
Carbon Sound Manager and that talks
to the HAL to talk to hardware.
And then audio units are
some processing units.
It's part of the audio toolbox
stuff that we'll be going into
tomorrow's session at 5:00.
So the Core Audio Framework,
we have frameworks on 10 and that's
how libraries and their header
files are presented to users.
The Core Audio Framework
has the audio hell,
that's where you find that.
There's an audio hardware.h file
in there that is where you find
the APIs and type defs and so forth
for interfacing to the audio hell.
It has basically the audio
device is the primary object,
we'll be going through
this in some detail today.
Audio Toolbox and Audio Unit Frameworks
are the high-level frameworks.
I'll be covered in detail tomorrow.
Audio Toolbox,
the aim there is to provide a
set of tools that you can use
in your application to do audio
tasks like sequencing a MIDI file,
dealing with different types of
events that might translate to
some changes in audio behavior,
like generating notes on a software
synthesizer or panning a sound from
one channel to another over time.
And if you've got a sequence of events,
you need some object to play it.
That's what the music player does.
Audio units,
I suppose the best way to think
about this is like a plug-in.
It's a way of taking audio,
of making a component
that will take audio in,
do something to it and spit audio out.
But some audio units
might just generate audio.
They might not have any audio input.
A good example of that would
be the software synthesizer.
And some audio units may
just sort of end there.
You don't see anything come out of them,
at least from the
application point of view.
You might get audio into
them and see nothing out.
And later on in this talk
we'll be talking about a unit
we call a default output unit.
And I'll leave the details of
that until later this afternoon.
Just to talk a little
bit about Sound Manager.
That's in Carbon.
Carbon Sound Manager.
It's nearly equivalent
API between what's on Tenum,
what's in the Classic.
There's some deprecated
APIs that we removed.
One that was very unpopular,
but we've been telling you for a long
time we're going to remove it anyway,
so we thought we would,
which is SoundPlay Double Buffer.
There is some sample code up on the
website if you want to see how you
can provide that capability yourself.
I think an important thing
to understand about the two,
the two platforms,
is that they're different roles
the Sound Manager performs
on both of those platforms.
On a Classic system,
the Sound Manager is a global state.
You can really see the whole state of
Sound Manager from all the different
applications and stuff by looking
at the Sound Manager in a nine.
It also provides a hardware model.
We have SDEV components,
we have input drivers,
input components and things like that,
that really do interface directly
to the hardware and for better
or worse this was the way that,
if you wanted Sound Manager and clients
of Sound Manager like QuickTime to
talk to your audio hardware,
you had to write components
for the Sound Manager.
On Mac OS X,
the Sound Manager is quite different.
It's a client of the audio system
and the audio system we have on
X is really called Core Audio,
which is what these talks are about.
On Mac OS X,
the Sound Manager is per process.
You don't have any idea what's
going on in another process
through Sound Manager calls.
It's only what's happening
in that particular process.
It also does not provide
the hardware model.
The lower levels of the
Sound Manager on X talk to the hell
and the hardware model for audio
devices are provided by I/O Kit,
specifically by the I/O audio family
classes and support capabilities.
So that's an important
distinction to understand.
Another important distinction
I think is the Sound Manager has a
native format of 16 bit integers.
Doesn't deal very well
with formats beyond that.
Doesn't deal very well with stereo,
with anything beyond stereo.
These are all limitations that we
hope we've completely gone beyond
with Core Audio where you can have
N channels of data where you can
deal with floating point 32 bit
as your primary generic format.
[Transcript missing]
Devices.
What devices?
Well, Apple currently supports
the USB audio class driver,
or as I was reminded earlier,
USB audio and MIDI.
I've got two slides for this.
We support obviously built-in hardware.
Most of Apple's built-in
hardware is 16-bit 44K stereo.
USB provides a completely different
thing and we'll show you some of the
extended work that we're doing to make
sure we do support USB audio as we should
on the platform later in this session.
Firewire Audio,
as Craig mentioned earlier, is a very,
we consider this at Apple to
be a very important technology
going forward for audio,
particularly for the pro audio space
for the high performance and the kind
of stringent demands of pro audio wants.
Firewire Audio is really
comprised of two things,
the 61883-6 transport layer,
it took me months to
remember that number,
and I can get it now,
and the MLan connection management.
The transport layer is just
how do you put audio and
MIDI data across Firewire bus.
MLan connection manager is intelligent
information that the devices can
publish about their capabilities
to other Firewire devices and
allows for configuration of a
network of audio or MIDI devices.
We are at Apple a signatory of the
MLan connection management stuff
and we will certainly be doing,
I think, some very interesting work
in this sphere going forward.
And it's a very similar story for MIDI.
We actually do provide
a USB MIDI class driver.
We also, in our developer example code,
provide a sample code for
vendor specific USB drivers,
so it's very easy if you're publishing
a vendor specific USB MIDI device
to just sort of take that code as
a basis and then provide a driver,
which many people in this room will
probably would like to use yesterday.
And we also have Firewire.
Okay.
So, we've got a couple of questions.
One is,
what are the plans for MIDI as part
of the MLan connection management?
So, you've had enough of me.
I'm going to bring up Jeff Moore now.
Jeff's the engineer.
Been working on the audio
hardware abstraction layer,
and please make him welcome.
Thank you.
I like you.
My job here is to kind of delve
into what the audio hardware
abstraction layer is all about.
So, as Bill said,
it provides the lowest user level
access to audio devices on the system.
Its role is to efficiently move
data to and from the device.
It also allows you to manipulate
device attributes like the volume,
the sample rate, mute, whatever.
And it also provides very strong
synchronization primitives to
allow you to know what's going on
at any given time in the hardware.
The design goals that we had for the HAL,
primarily the first foremost,
a clean low overhead signal path.
We don't want to introduce any
distortion into your signal at all.
And further,
we want to get out of your way.
We want to make sure it's getting out
to the hardware as fast as it can.
Another big ticket item is multiple
simultaneous client access.
To single audio devices.
That's been a hallmark feature
of the Macintosh forever.
We needed to carry that forward.
And then it's to break through some
of the bottlenecks we had on OS 9.
You know, more channels,
higher bit depths, higher sample rates.
And then again, you know,
synchronization.
It's like, I can't say it enough.
I mean,
it's like one of the most important
things that we do now with audio on 10.
And then finally,
we came up with a pretty small API.
But it's fairly complete.
We think that it should cover the
majority of the needs that people
will have to do when trying to
manipulate their audio hardware.
The API itself is object-oriented C code.
That's not objective C code.
But it has a Java interface as well.
Since it's object-oriented,
it has two major objects.
It has a device object,
which basically encapsulates
all the information you need
to know about the device.
And access to the actual device.
And then there's a kind
of a more nebulous object,
which is a global context,
which allows you access to
information about the system,
such as, you know,
the device list and whatnot.
So every object in the
system has properties,
and properties manipulate the
different aspects of the object.
Things like the name, the buffer size,
volume of channel 2, whatever.
You can pretty much describe anything
about a device in terms of properties.
The actual property itself
is a unique identifier.
It's a 32-bit int, and they can have an
arbitrary amount of data.
And there is no self-description
mechanism like you get
from an Apple event.
The data types you get are agreed on,
and they're documented
in the header files.
And it's also important to know that some
of the properties are only read-only.
You need to make sure you're
checking with the device before
you try to set a property.
Some devices may allow you to
check with the device before
you try to set a property.
Some may change the sample rate.
Some may not.
And then finally,
another big important thing about
properties is that you can sign up for
notifications for when things change.
So if someone changes the system volume,
you can find out about it.
So the global properties are all
referenced using the routines in the
API that use the prefix audio hardware.
The constants and everything that
pertain to the global context,
you'll see the words audio
hardware in their name somewhere.
The important properties when
you're looking at the global
space are the device list,
which is the default
input and output device.
And then there's a kind
of a fourth property,
which is whether or not you
want the machine to idle sleep
while you're playing sound.
By default,
that's disabled so that idle sleeping
won't happen while you're playing sound,
much like it happens on OS 9.
So here's a code example of how you
would go about getting the device list.
The first step is to call audio
hardware get property info because
the device list is documented
to be a variable length array.
So you need to find out
what the device list is.
And then you need to find out how
much memory it's going to take up.
So one of the parameters you get
back from audio hardware get property
info is the actual size of the data.
And you can see -- and then to
get the number of actual devices,
you divide the size you get back,
which is in bytes,
by the size of an audio device ID.
Then you allocate the
memory to hold the list.
And then you call audio
hardware get property.
And you pass that memory
you just allocated in.
And the HAL will go then and
fill out all the device IDs for
all the devices on the system.
And then you can peruse and
get information about those
devices and use which devices you
want that best fit your needs.
And then once you have a device,
all the routines, again,
we use audio device to refer to
the things that manipulate devices.
As you'll see, devices are addressed with
a very specific protocol.
You need to make sure you're
asking about an input or an
output property and exactly what
channel you are talking about.
Simple, but it's also very particular
about doing things like that.
The important properties that
you'll see with a device are,
of course, the buffer size of the device
for doing the I/O transfers.
An important thing to realize about
that is the buffer size is not
just settable by the application.
It's settable for each
application individually.
One application can be communicating
with a device at a buffer size of,
say, 64 frames,
and another process could be
communicating with the same device
with a buffer size of 2,048 frames.
It's what Bill was talking about when
he was talking about controllable
latency on a per-process basis.
We think this is one of the big
new features of audio on 10.
Then you'll also want to know things
about the layout of the device,
and you can use the stream
configuration property to do that.
Then you'll also want to know
things about the volume and mute,
and what data source you're talking to.
They're all individual
properties for the device.
Here's a code example of how
you would go about setting the
volume of channel 2 on a device.
First thing you need to find
out is if you actually can
set the volume of channel 2.
Again,
you use Audio Device Git Property Info.
You can see how I'm being very
particular about specifying channel 2.
I'm also making sure I'm finding
out ahead of time whether or not
I actually can set the property.
Then when I figure it out,
you just turn around and call
Audio Device Set Property.
In this case,
the volume scaler is a floating
point number from 0 to 1.
In this example,
we're setting the volume to full on.
So now you kind of know your
way around the API a little bit.
Now it's time to talk a little
bit about how you actually get
audio data to the hardware.
We rethought how audio I/O was
done to take advantage of
what OS X really does well.
In particular,
OS X is really good at handling
shared memory and threading and things
that OS 9 really wasn't as good at.
It's a little less good at things
like hardware that has high degrees,
high rates of interrupts being fired.
So we had to work around all these
different constraints and come up
with a system that could deliver
the performance we were looking for
without having to re-architect the
entire kernel from the inside out.
So the model we came up with is
basically the hardware and the
HAL that have a ring buffer that
is a pretty large ring buffer.
It's about 3/4 of a second
in size for most drivers.
And that one ring buffer is
shared all across the system.
So, and the hardware tracks its progress
through the ring buffer by time stamping
the point at which it wraps back around.
So the DMA engine is cycling through the
buffer and when it jumps back around,
it will generate some timing information.
And that is also coincidentally
the only time when you'll
see a hardware interrupt.
So the hardware rate,
the interrupt rate of the system
has gone way down compared to OS 9.
And this is much less
taxing on the system.
You get better throughput.
The rest of the system is a lot happier.
And as people are finding,
audio is becoming more and more
integrated in what you're doing
in other parts of the system.
So it's really important
to be well behaved.
So to move data in and
out of the ring buffer,
the HAL provides what's
called an I/O thread.
And each device has a single
I/O thread in each process in
order to call your function that
will provide or consume data.
This thread is a Mach real-time thread.
The reason why we do that is that
Mach real-time threads have certain
guarantees about the level of accuracy
they will get for latency in scheduling.
So when the HAL says this thread needs
to wake up at such and such a time,
because it's a Mach real-time thread,
we're pretty guaranteed that
it's going to wake up pretty
close to when we asked it to.
And then the HAL will also use another
lower priority thread in order to
handle all the property notifications.
And the client can actually have some
degree of control over the priority.
And timing characteristics of that
thread using the audio hardware
property run loop to tell the
HAL about your own CF run loop that
you want your notifications fired in.
So I'm going to walk you through kind
of the algorithm of the I/O thread
so you kind of have an idea of what's
going on kind of behind the scenes.
So the first thing that happens is
when the HAL first enters the loop,
the work loop of the I/O thread,
is it goes to sleep.
The reason why is that it needs
to prepare for input data.
So presumably the hardware
has just started up,
and now it needs to wait for the first
full buffer's worth of input data.
So the very first thing it does is
figure out when that's going to be,
and then it puts the
thread to sleep until then.
So then when it comes back and wakes up,
presumably all the input data,
if it's there, is available now.
So it calculates what the actual
timestamp is of that input data.
And then it calls down into the
kernel to actually fill up all the
buffers out of the ring buffer.
The driver itself has complete control
over the transfer out of the ring
buffer and into the client's buffer.
And then the same is true for output,
but in this case we're about to call
out to ask the client for output.
So we have to figure out
when we want the client,
what time it is that we're
asking the client for audio.
And then we set up their audio
buffers by clearing them out.
The one thing that the HAL does
is that it tries to isolate
you as much as possible from
other clients on the system.
So you don't have to worry about
necessarily accumulating to a buffer
or worrying that someone else is going
to have already written data there.
And then once we have the input
and output data marshalled,
we then call out to all
the client I/O procs.
And I'll talk a little bit more
about writing I/O procs in a minute.
So once the I/O procs have all assembled,
presumably they've consumed the
input data and they provided
the requested output data,
the HAL will then have to call back
down into the driver to mix the
provided data into the system's mix bus.
This is all part of the shared
device management we have,
and it's also the main reason
why we use Float32 as our lingua
franca as far as sample formats go.
We want to maintain the headroom of
the mix as far down and as close to the
hardware as possible to minimize the
amount of distortion added to the signal.
Then once we've handled the mixing,
the HAL will also then handle
any reentrant actions that
might have occurred by calling
out to the client I/O procs.
For instance,
you might want to adjust the
buffer size on the fly to
adjust your own performance.
This is a very common
problem with I/O procs.
The HAL has a mechanism for catching
those circumstances and handling it after
that complete I/O cycle has completed.
[Transcript missing]
So next up,
you're going to need to have an
I/O proc for the I/O thread to call.
So you register your
I/O proc with the device,
and then you have to start and stop them.
You do individual transactions
on starting and stopping
based on the I/O proc,
not on the entire device.
And the reason why is that these guys
are shared across the whole system.
When you register your I/O proc,
the hardware may already be in use by
someone else in a different process.
So we manage the state
relative to the I/O proc.
So when you start your I/O proc,
the device will only start if
this is the actual first I/O proc
on the entire system that is
starting up on that device.
And the converse is true
with stopping the device.
So when your I/O proc is called,
you're going to receive all the input
data and you're going to be provided
with a buffer in which to write all
the output data for that time slice.
And there are going to be timestamps
that tell you exactly what's going on,
where those buffers
belong in the timeline.
The input timestamp will tell
you when the first frame of
the input data was acquired.
And the output timestamp will tell
you when the first frame is going
to be written out to the hardware.
The final timestamp is
also the current time,
which as you'll see from
the previous diagram,
falls in between.
That gives you some dead reckoning
on what's going on in the system.
You might use that to sync
other subsystems to what's
going on in the hardware.
So when your I/O proc is called,
we pass everything in.
The data is passed into
your I/O proc using an audio
buffer list data structure.
An audio buffer list is a collection
of individual audio buffers.
And you'll get a buffer for each
stream that the audio device has.
And you can think of a stream
in this case as being a single
interleaved container for the data.
So a device might have two streams
that have two channels in each stream.
And the audio buffer
list will reflect that,
that you'll receive.
So what we're really trying to
do is kind of mimic what the
hardware is presenting to us,
to you.
And you can find out ahead of time what
that's actually going to look like by
using the stream configuration property.
So that if you want to set up-- if you
want to know what's going on so you
can set up your blit loops or whatever,
the information's there.
So this is kind of a code
example of an actual I/O proc.
You can see this slide has
the prototype of an I/O proc.
You see you get the device ID,
you get all the timestamps,
you get the individual
audio buffer lists,
and you also get a client data pointer,
AKA a Refcon from OS 9.
And you can use the client data
pointer for anything you want.
In this case, this I/O proc,
I'm using the client data pointer
as a pointer to my C++ object
that has my audio engine in it.
So basically, you have to make sure
you're-- in the I/O proc,
you make sure you're checking for null.
The device can change format on
you between calls to your I/O proc.
It can change format on you between
your call to getting the format
of the device and your I/O proc.
The only way to be sure you know
what's going on is to sign up for
notifications on the format properties.
But in the I/O proc,
you should always make sure you're
doing your sanity checks or you
will crash and die horribly.
So, you can see in this case,
we're basically doing all that.
I passed the input buffers and
the input timestamps to my engine.
In this slide we see how you actually
register and unregister an I/O proc.
It's pretty straightforward.
Add I/O proc, remove I/O proc.
And you can see how I'm passing
in the pointer to my engine
object in this case as well.
And then starting and
stopping is very much similar.
There's individual
calls to start and stop.
and next up,
I'm going to bring up Doug Wyatt.
He's another engineer for Core Audio and
he's going to talk a little bit
about the default output unit,
which is going to allow you to ignore
everything I just told you about.
Thanks, Jeff.
You won't have to ignore everything
about it because there's some parts
of the default output unit that build
on top of the HAL data structures,
as we'll see.
I also wanted to just correct
something Bill said earlier.
The two sessions tomorrow,
the earlier one at 3:30 is the one
on the audio toolbox and audio units,
and the later one at 5:00 is on MIDI.
Yeah, the time's reversed.
Okay, so the default output unit
is a component that provides you with
a slightly simpler API to the HAL.
You don't have to worry about
receiving quite as many notifications.
And it builds in a sample
rate converter for you.
So if you want to render data at 22K,
you don't have to care whether
the hardware is at 44K or 48K.
You can just render your 22K data,
say I want a sample
rate converter in there,
and it'll do the conversion for you.
So I'd like to just walk through a simple
example of using the default output unit.
It doesn't take a whole lot to write
a program to generate sound this way.
and David There's a call open default
output unit to open the component.
Audio unit initialized to initialize it.
Here we're going to
manipulate the HAL device.
So first we want to find out what it is.
We make the call to AudioUnitGetProperty,
passing the property constant,
kAudioOutputUnitPropertyCurrentDevice.
and David We passed the global scope.
I'm not sure that's necessary,
but it's the best choice.
And we'll get back the audio
device ID of the current device.
Here in this example,
we're going to set our client's
buffer size to 64 frames,
which is only 1.5 milliseconds.
We're going to render some audio
in a very responsive manner.
So we're calculating the
buffer size in bytes,
64 frames times the number of channels,
which is probably two, but could be more,
depending on how -- we would have
interrogated the stream format of
the device to find out for sure.
In any case, it's 64 times the number of
channels times the size of a float.
And then we're making a call to
the how audio device set property
to change the buffer size at
which this client will get called,
or rather the interval at which this
client will get called to render data.
Having done that,
the next thing we'll do is set
up a sample rate conversion.
In this example,
I want to render data at 22,050 hertz.
I don't care what the
hardware sample rate is.
So there's a property on the audio unit,
the default output unit,
called kAudioUnit property sample rate.
Now, here the scope is important
because this audio unit,
if you ask it for its sample
rate in the global scope,
it will give you back
the hardware sample rate.
Whereas if you want to manipulate or
interrogate the input sample rate,
as you would -- in this example,
you're saying I want to render at 22k.
So we're telling the audio unit, yes,
my input is at 22k.
And so we're passing a g sample rate.
And the next step is to
provide a callback function
to the audio unit to tell it,
here's a function in which
I want to do my rendering.
And this is kind of a simpler
version of the HALS I/O proc,
as we'll see in a moment.
We fill out an audio unit input callback
structure with a pointer to a function.
The refcon here is null,
but it can be any piece of data that
you want to access in your renderer.
and David Then we make another call to
AudioUnit set property with the constant
KAudioUnit property set input callback,
also in the global scope.
And so that's telling the AudioUnit,
whenever you want to render data,
call me back at this function.
and here's an example of what a
rendering function looks like.
Like I said a moment ago,
it's pretty similar to the
Hal rendering function.
The first parameter you
get back is your RefCon.
You get some flags.
and David Well,
we don't need to go into those.
They're usually not used.
You get the time stamp for output.
You're getting a bus number,
which is relevant when there
are multiple streams of audio.
And you're getting an audio buffer,
which is one of the buffers that
the HAL provided in its callback.
So you can look at that
I/O data parameter,
which is an audio buffer,
and find out how many channels are in it,
what the buffer size is in bytes,
and from that we can compute
the number of frames.
We can set up a local pointer,
sample pointer, as a float32,
and treat that as an array into
which we can fill our sample data.
That's pretty much all there is to
rendering to the default output unit.
After having gotten all that prepared,
we can just make a call to
Audio Output Unit Start.
The HAL will get fired up.
It will start running.
Our rendering proc will
start getting called back.
We can synthesize sine waves or
horrible noises or whatever we want.
And when we're done,
we can call Audio Unit Stop --
Audio Output Unit Stop,
rather.
And when we're completely done,
we can call Close Component
to get rid of it.
That's the default output unit.
It's a pretty simple and
high-level interface to the HAL.
So this demo, I believe, is Jeff's.
I'll turn it back over to you.
Thanks.
So what we're going to do now is,
for the very first time I think,
we're going to demonstrate on an
Apple operating system built-in system
services for multi-channel sound output.
So I'm just going to go ahead
and play it and then tell you
a little bit more afterwards.
[Transcript missing]
The first thing I want to do is kind
of show you what we're using here.
This is a stock
Wall Street PowerBook running
OS X with a USB PC card attached to it.
This is the eMagic EMI26.
Thank you, eMagic.
And this is on sale today.
And it's using our stock
built-in USB audio class driver.
This is all built into the system.
It's great.
A couple other things I want to show
you about this little test app here.
This little test app is in the
/developer/examples/core-audio directory.
It was written by one
of our other engineers,
Bob Aaron, to kind of demonstrate what's
going on in the how and kind
of where everything's at.
It kind of gives you a user interface
for all the different little properties
you'll see in the header files.
In particular,
you'll see it shows the buffer
size in bytes and in frames.
It shows you all the format information
that you might have for the device.
It allows you to change the format.
And then it gives you individual
controls over the hardware for as long
as the hardware has it implemented.
You notice in this case that
this device only has a master
output volume and a master mute.
So you can see it now.
I'll switch to the
built-in output device.
And you can see it has
two left/right control,
individual channel controls,
and no master.
But it does still have a master mute.
The how does not abstract
this away from you.
If you're looking for a master control,
it may not be there.
You need to be prepared for that.
The how is not going to hide what's going
on in the hardware from you too much.
Obviously,
it's going to abstract a little
bit of stuff away from you,
obviously the sample
format being one of them.
You can see that there's
a whole lot in here.
And I encourage you to go and build this
code example yourself and play with it.
And those of you bringing up hardware,
this is a great test tool to figure
out if you're doing everything right.
So I think I'll play that again,
kind of give you-- the track
I'm playing here is a 5.1 mix.
It's a six-channel AIFF file
that I authored last week.
So I think I'm just going to
go ahead and play it again.
Turn the volume down.
[Transcript missing]
The app is called Daisy and
you have the source code.
It's already installed in your system
if you install the developer tools.
I think that's pretty much it.
Can we go back to the slides please?
Next, Bill is going to come up and
tell you more about Java.
So we'll be doing some
Q&A and stuff in a minute,
so don't all rush off unless you
want to get to the beer bust,
but we won't keep you too much longer.
I hate to keep a man from his beer.
So I don't actually have any
examples today that I want to show
you about the Cordia Java stuff.
I do have some stuff tomorrow
that I'll go through.
The audio hardware and the audio
device stuff is in core audio Java.
It's in actually a
com.apple.audio.hardware package.
You'll see the same kinds of
APIs that Jeff has talk about,
start, stop.
You've got audio device,
IOProc is a Java interface.
You implement that interface and
then you instantiate that interface
as your call back in order to render
data for the audio device IOProc.
The default output audio
unit is there as well.
One thing I'd like to add to
those comments is that that will,
the reason the default output unit
is there is to track choices that
the user might make in the system
control panel when the system control
panel will let you make choices,
which it currently doesn't.
So you might imagine that you could
have a user that might have two or
three different audio devices on their
system and they would like to say,
well, my, you know,
default output device,
will be the USB guy,
it will be built in audio.
And the default output unit will
listen for those things and it
will switch automatically for you.
So your application,
if you're just doing basic audio stuff,
this becomes a very useful service
at the bottom and it's the same
kind of service that the sound
manager itself sits on top of.
The default output unit is
actually an extension of something
we call a HAL output unit.
So if you're writing audio
units or you're using audio
units to do your application,
you can use a HAL output unit
just to talk to a particular
device or you can use this guy if
you want to track any changes the
user might make to their system.
And as Doug said,
he showed you setting the sample rate,
you can also not have it do the
sample rate conversion if you want
to take care of that detail yourself.
It's not a requirement
that it does that for you.
With the Cordia Java stuff,
there's Java doc that's available.
And I'll give you some URLs at the end
of this talk for that sign of stuff.
Regardless of the language that you use,
we're really not sort of language
centric in the Corio group,
because I'm there I suppose
more than anything else,
otherwise it would all be C++.
So we really kind of stress that you
should understand the architecture,
whether you're going to approach
dealing with the API through
C or C++ or through Java,
you really need to understand
the architecture of how
the system is working.
You need to understand the
underpinnings of the system and these
are really not language constructs,
they're architectural
constructs that you should do.
So when we talk about an
API for the Java platform,
we're not talking about
any additional capability.
We haven't rewritten
this whole thing in Java,
it's not going to be portable because
it's based on a native audio engine,
but we're just providing
an access to it from Java.
So some of the stuff that you see today,
if you go home on your
Mac OS X system now and you run DAISY,
you'll see it looks a little
bit different than the
version that we're running.
We've done additional work since
Mac OS X was released in order to support
the USB stuff that we were showing today.
And we are very interested
in doing technology.
Obviously we're going to release
this stuff to the broader
community as soon as we can.
I just don't want you to sort of
get a false expectation of going
home and trying it doesn't work
and then you're going to abuse me.
So you can contact us.
I'll give you an email at the end
of the talk today about contacting
us if you're interested in getting
technology seeding from us.
And of course, you know,
we're close to releasing this
to the general public as well.
So another thing that we're
sort of announcing today is
we have a mailing list up.
Apple sponsors a website
called list.apple.com.
These are not really Apple's,
Apple run lists or anything.
They're really a service
to Apple developers and the
Apple community that's basically there.
You can get it from Apple.
But these aren't sort of like,
I suppose they are in some way
official Apple mailing lists.
But they're not official
Apple mailing lists.
They're your mailing lists.
They're not censored or
monitored by people at Apple.
They're really,
it's your resource that you can use.
You can support each other with it.
We obviously like to be
involved in these things.
And we do now have a
core audio mailing list.
And I'm pleased about it.
And you can get there at list.apple.com
and you'll see the core audio list.
And we'll field any
questions there on Java,
core audio stuff, on the MIDI stuff,
on the things that we'll
cover tomorrow in the talks.
And also today we have a website
up that actually talks about
Mac OS X audio for the first time.
And it's developer.apple.com/audio.
Okay.
And we're also this
close to documentation.
We realize it's been a very,
very frustrating experience for
us and probably for you about,
well, this stuff is there but how do
you know about it because we're
not telling anybody about it.
It's sort of a best kept secret.
But up on the audio website
there will be a PDF.
It's a draft only of the core audio APIs.
And we're doing more work and
we'll update that in the future.
If that's not available by tomorrow,
then it will be available
early next week.
And it's a pretty good
sort of first pass.
And we're also on the mailing list
so if you get the documentation,
you've got SDK examples and
we're more than happy to answer
questions and help you with
problems or listen to your feedback.
So we really welcome your input.
Ok, there's a sound networking
for games session tomorrow,
and then they're the two
times of the sessions,
and they're the right times,
not the wrong times.
I'll come back to this slide probably.
Ok, so if you've got any
questions on Firewire or USB,
as Craig said earlier,
this is stuff that we're fairly
involved in with the audio community.
So, you can contact Craig at that
address and develop a seating,
which I talked about earlier.
You can send us an email and we will
certainly consider your request.